README.md, before:

# CAMEL Extensions

This project provides a comprehensive system for managing, observing, and improving CAMEL AI agents. It includes a FastAPI backend and Streamlit GUI frontend, focusing on facilitating workflows like the proposer-executor loop and streamlining the Direct Preference Optimization (DPO) training process.

![CAMEL Logo](misc/logo_light.png)

## Features

- **Workflow Execution:** Initiate and observe pre-defined CAMEL agent workflows in real-time
- **Configuration Management:** View and modify configurations for agents and workflows via a user-friendly interface
- **Log Exploration & Annotation:** Review historical agent interactions and create preference data for DPO training
- **DPO Training:** Configure and start DPO training runs for agents using annotated data
- **Real-time Updates:** WebSocket connections for live workflow and training monitoring
- **API Backend:** RESTful API for programmatic access to all functionality

## Architecture Overview

This project follows a modern architecture with a clear separation between frontend and backend:

- **Frontend**: Streamlit-based GUI with API client integration
- **Backend**: FastAPI server providing RESTful endpoints and WebSocket connections
- **Database**: SQLAlchemy ORM with migrations (Alembic) supporting SQLite or PostgreSQL
- **Services**: Core business logic services for configuration, workflows, database, and DPO training

See the [architecture documentation](docs/architecture.md) for a detailed overview.

## Setup Instructions

### Prerequisites

- Python 3.10 or 3.11 (camel-ai is not compatible with Python 3.12+)
- pip (for installing dependencies)
- Docker and Docker Compose (optional, for containerized deployment)

### Quick Start with Docker

1. Clone the repository:
   ```bash
   git clone https://github.com/camel-ai/camel.git
   cd camel
   ```

2. Start the application using Docker Compose:
   ```bash
   docker-compose up
   ```

3. Access the application:
   - Frontend: http://localhost:8501
   - Backend API: http://localhost:8000
   - API Documentation: http://localhost:8000/docs

### Local Development Setup

1. Clone the repository:
   ```bash
   git clone https://github.com/camel-ai/camel.git
   cd camel
   ```

2. Create and activate a Python virtual environment:
   ```bash
   python -m venv venv
   source venv/bin/activate  # On Windows: .\venv\Scripts\activate
   ```

3. Install dependencies:
   ```bash
   pip install -r requirements.txt
   ```

4. Set up environment variables (optional):
   ```bash
   cp .env.example .env
   # Edit .env file with your settings
   ```

5. Initialize the database:
   ```bash
   cd backend
   alembic upgrade head
   ```

6. Load demo data (optional):
   ```bash
   python backend/scripts/load_demo_data.py
   ```

7. Start the backend:
   ```bash
   cd backend
   uvicorn api.main:app --reload
   ```

8. Start the frontend (in a new terminal):
   ```bash
   streamlit run gui/app.py
   ```

9. Access the application:
   - Frontend: http://localhost:8501
   - Backend API: http://localhost:8000
   - API Documentation: http://localhost:8000/docs

### API Keys (Optional)

Set up necessary API keys as environment variables (e.g., `OPENAI_API_KEY`). The specific keys required will depend on the Large Language Models (LLMs) you configure for your agents in `configs/agents.yaml`.

## Project Structure

```
camel/
├── backend/                # Backend API and services
│   ├── api/                # FastAPI application
│   │   ├── routers/        # API endpoints
│   │   └── main.py         # API entry point
│   ├── core/               # Core business logic
│   │   └── services/       # Service implementations
│   ├── db/                 # Database models and access
│   │   └── models/         # SQLAlchemy models
│   └── migrations/         # Alembic migrations
├── configs/                # Configuration files
│   └── agents.yaml         # Agent configuration
├── gui/                    # Frontend Streamlit application
│   ├── views/              # UI view components
│   ├── api_client.py       # API client for backend communication
│   ├── websocket_client.py # WebSocket client for real-time updates
│   └── app.py              # GUI entry point
├── docs/                   # Documentation
│   └── architecture.md     # Architecture overview
├── models/                 # Default directory for trained models
├── docker-compose.yml      # Docker Compose configuration
├── Makefile                # Development utilities
├── CONTRIBUTING.md         # Contribution guidelines
└── ROADMAP.md              # Future development plans
```

## Development with Make

For easier development, we provide a Makefile with common tasks:

```bash
# Setup dependencies
make setup

# Start both API and GUI in development mode
make run-all

# Start only API in development mode
make dev-api

# Start only GUI in development mode
make dev-gui

# Load demo data
make fixtures

# Run tests
make test

# Run end-to-end tests
make e2e

# Clean up temporary files
make clean
```

## API Documentation

When the backend is running, you can access the API documentation:

- Swagger UI: http://localhost:8000/docs
- ReDoc: http://localhost:8000/redoc

## Contributing

We welcome contributions! Please read our [Contributing Guidelines](CONTRIBUTING.md) before submitting a pull request.

See the [Roadmap](ROADMAP.md) for information about planned features and improvements.

## License

This project is licensed under the Apache 2.0 License. See the `LICENSE` file for details.

Commit message:

Fix configuration and script integration issues
- Update agents.yaml to match ConfigManager expectations
- Replace template placeholders with actual values
- Update train_dpo.py script to work with the backend
- Add clarifications about Docker and dependencies in README

README.md, after:

# CAMEL Extensions

This project provides a comprehensive system for managing, observing, and improving CAMEL AI agents. It includes a FastAPI backend and Streamlit GUI frontend, focusing on facilitating workflows like the proposer-executor loop and streamlining the Direct Preference Optimization (DPO) training process.

![CAMEL Logo](misc/logo_light.png)

## Features

- **Workflow Execution:** Initiate and observe pre-defined CAMEL agent workflows in real-time
- **Configuration Management:** View and modify configurations for agents and workflows via a user-friendly interface
- **Log Exploration & Annotation:** Review historical agent interactions and create preference data for DPO training
- **DPO Training:** Configure and start DPO training runs for agents using annotated data
- **Real-time Updates:** WebSocket connections for live workflow and training monitoring
- **API Backend:** RESTful API for programmatic access to all functionality

## Architecture Overview

This project follows a modern architecture with a clear separation between frontend and backend:

- **Frontend**: Streamlit-based GUI with API client integration
- **Backend**: FastAPI server providing RESTful endpoints and WebSocket connections
- **Database**: SQLAlchemy ORM with migrations (Alembic) supporting SQLite or PostgreSQL
- **Services**: Core business logic services for configuration, workflows, database, and DPO training

See the [architecture documentation](docs/architecture.md) for a detailed overview.

## Setup Instructions

### Prerequisites

- Python 3.10 or 3.11 (camel-ai is not compatible with Python 3.12+)
- pip (for installing dependencies)
- Docker and Docker Compose (optional, for containerized deployment)

### Quick Start with Docker

1. Clone the repository:
   ```bash
   git clone https://github.com/camel-ai/camel.git
   cd camel
   ```

2. Start the application using Docker Compose:
   ```bash
   docker-compose up
   ```

3. Access the application:
   - Frontend: http://localhost:8501
   - Backend API: http://localhost:8000
   - API Documentation: http://localhost:8000/docs

### Local Development Setup

1. Clone the repository:
   ```bash
   git clone https://github.com/camel-ai/camel.git
   cd camel
   ```

2. Create and activate a Python virtual environment:
   ```bash
   python -m venv venv
   source venv/bin/activate  # On Windows: .\venv\Scripts\activate
   ```

3. Install dependencies:
   ```bash
   pip install -r requirements.txt
   ```

4. Set up environment variables (optional):
   ```bash
   cp .env.example .env
   # Edit .env file with your settings
   ```

5. Initialize the database:
   ```bash
   cd backend
   alembic upgrade head
   ```

6. Load demo data (optional):
   ```bash
   python backend/scripts/load_demo_data.py
   ```

7. Start the backend:
   ```bash
   cd backend
   uvicorn api.main:app --reload
   ```

8. Start the frontend (in a new terminal):
   ```bash
   streamlit run gui/app.py
   ```

9. Access the application:
   - Frontend: http://localhost:8501
   - Backend API: http://localhost:8000
   - API Documentation: http://localhost:8000/docs

### API Keys (Optional)

Set up necessary API keys as environment variables (e.g., `OPENAI_API_KEY`). The specific keys required will depend on the Large Language Models (LLMs) you configure for your agents in `configs/agents.yaml`.

## Project Structure

```
camel/
├── backend/                # Backend API and services
│   ├── api/                # FastAPI application
│   │   ├── routers/        # API endpoints
│   │   └── main.py         # API entry point
│   ├── core/               # Core business logic
│   │   └── services/       # Service implementations
│   ├── db/                 # Database models and access
│   │   └── models/         # SQLAlchemy models
│   └── migrations/         # Alembic migrations
├── configs/                # Configuration files
│   └── agents.yaml         # Agent configuration
├── gui/                    # Frontend Streamlit application
│   ├── views/              # UI view components
│   ├── api_client.py       # API client for backend communication
│   ├── websocket_client.py # WebSocket client for real-time updates
│   └── app.py              # GUI entry point
├── docs/                   # Documentation
│   └── architecture.md     # Architecture overview
├── models/                 # Default directory for trained models
├── docker-compose.yml      # Docker Compose for the full application stack
├── .container/             # Original CAMEL project container configs (not used for extensions)
├── Makefile                # Development utilities
├── CONTRIBUTING.md         # Contribution guidelines
└── ROADMAP.md              # Future development plans
```

## Note About Docker Configuration

This project includes two Docker Compose configurations:

1. `docker-compose.yml` at the project root: This is the main Docker configuration for the CAMEL Extensions application, combining the backend API, GUI, database, and Redis.

2. `.container/docker-compose.yaml`: This is from the original CAMEL project and is not used for the Extensions application. It's retained for compatibility with the base CAMEL library development.

When working with CAMEL Extensions, always use the root `docker-compose.yml` file.

## About Future Dependencies

Some packages like Celery and Redis are included in the requirements even though features using them are marked as future enhancements in the ROADMAP.md file. This is to facilitate development and testing of these features as they are implemented.

## Development with Make

For easier development, we provide a Makefile with common tasks:

```bash
# Setup dependencies
make setup

# Start both API and GUI in development mode
make run-all

# Start only API in development mode
make dev-api

# Start only GUI in development mode
make dev-gui

# Load demo data
make fixtures

# Run tests
make test

# Run end-to-end tests
make e2e

# Clean up temporary files
make clean
```

## API Documentation

When the backend is running, you can access the API documentation:

- Swagger UI: http://localhost:8000/docs
- ReDoc: http://localhost:8000/redoc

## Contributing

We welcome contributions! Please read our [Contributing Guidelines](CONTRIBUTING.md) before submitting a pull request.

See the [Roadmap](ROADMAP.md) for information about planned features and improvements.

## License

This project is licensed under the Apache 2.0 License. See the `LICENSE` file for details.
